Cynthia says that the only way George will go is if
we're going, because he doesn't like to travel.
And we enjoy being with one another. It's very
comfortable. And
so we made, I would say, a half a dozen trips
together to China and Yugoslavia, through Italy,
France. And we generally rent a car together, or
two cars, whatever the case may be. And we have a lot
of adventures. And of course, in the process, we
get into a town, I check out the restaurants. And I
have an instinct for it. That's a good quality to
have. I took a walk through town. I found a place
around the corner that I think would be perfect.
And we haven't had too many bad meals that way. I can
tell by the menu, by the ambience. Sometimes I can
go in and talk to the proprietor, his shed looks
clean and all, whatever the case may be. So I'm his
restaurant grazer. That's good. And we've had a
lot of interest. We went all through Sicily
together. And I realized maybe that wasn't a good
choice, because taking George Mitchell with his
wealth to Sicily is what the band has got us. And on
the other hand, nothing happened. No problem. No
problem at all. But at any rate, the Woodlands was
full of excitement to me. I saw it as an aesthetic
accomplishment as well as a practical
accomplishment about providing good living,
good environment for families. So as George went
along, he would share his dream with me every step
of the way. Not that he saw my advice or some things I
can't help with, you know, real estate matters and
all that, but when he talked about having a
research center and when he talked about Park, and
we talked about that, he would park those ideas to
me just as a means of, I guess, using a council or a
friend as a backboard, you know, and talk about it.
And his ideas were always exciting and
far-reaching. I never thought he would do the
thing. No, I knew he would do what he did in terms of
Park, but his ambitions were so far-reaching What
do you see as the distinctive or unusual qualities
of the Way? It's more than this new community idea
presented in that book, it seems to me. What is
special? What's special about this place? I don't
think people, most people appreciate the fact
that this is wonderful living. Freedom from
Social insecurity, like we see in the big city. I
live in Chicago. You have to be very careful
walking down certain streets at night. Chicago
less so than New York or Los Angeles. So you have
that. You have a perfect environment for
children, I think. It's a beautiful place to live.
The buys are fantastic. The values are fantastic.
You have a man who is sincerely devoted provided
the best environment there is in the country. It's
like going into a restaurant, you've got the
proprietor you can talk to. And there's a direct
communication in a way to George Mitchell,
because he's patrolling the place all the time.
It's his baby. He's very interested in
everything. And to me it's so incredible that
George is so detail-minded. I think I'm that way
too. But George, he's He'll drive down some
street, and if you see something wrong, he'll
attend to it or call somebody. He's on the premise.
He's not a remote entrepreneur. So his very heart
and spirit are in this place. What about the
research component in the Woodlands? Is that
something relatively new, or did you sense that
that was developing early on also? In other words,
the integrated economic community seems to be...
Well, I have a feeling that I didn't quite
appreciate it at the start, because I didn't
realize how far he was going to go with it. I knew
what it was, and I knew it would be an important
component here, because I was familiar with the
gold triangle down at Duke, and I knew what they
did. And I was once called on to lecture there, and I
got a little better penetration than most
outsiders. But I think he's done something that's
so remarkable. It's fraught with problems. The
problem is essentially that George is such a
benevolent benefactor and that people feel,
well, if they need money, George can do it. That's
really the big problem there, that it's so closely
identified with the Woodlands and George
Mitchell that the community takes the position,
well, we really don't have to help it too much
because it's George's baby and he can give the
money. And George continues to help them
financially. But on the other hand, he wants them
to get themselves free from him, not because of the
money, because he thinks it's good for their
long-range future and thinks the community will
embrace it. Now, whether the community will ever
do it adequately, because it's in the woodlands,
is a question. You also have a series of
universities, each of which has their own destiny
in mind. They favor Park. On the other hand,
they're mostly concerned about their own
identification. And I can see that. In a way,
they're in competition with each other. But they
don't realize. I want to be very careful what I say,
if it's a matter of record, not to cause any
problems for George and his relationship. No, I
don't care. I'll be very careful. Early in my
relationship with the Hertz Enterprise, and I
worked on this, I realized something very
important. The licensees, some of the licensees
were very upset that they had to handle referrals,
calls for the rental of a car for other licensees.
You're living in Milwaukee. You call the guy and
you say, I need a car in Chicago tomorrow. And he has
to communicate with Chicago. Some short-sighted
licensees would say, hell, I don't get anything
out of that. Why should I give them any special
attention? Yet, the reason those licensees grew
and prospered, became so enormous, was the Hertz
program grew enormously. They were able to
attract a big subsidy advertising program from
major car manufacturers. They were advertised to
such an extent that the guy in Milwaukee began to
prosper. He got a lot of business out of this
cooperative effort. Yet early in the game, he
resisted it. That's a pain in the ass for me to work
on their problems. I don't get anything out of it. I
keep the clerk busy all the time handling
referrals to Miami, for example. So I think the
same thing applies here. There has to be a
tremendous amount of work by all the universities
to make HAARC grow and become very important, as a
result of which HAARC's umbrella will bring more
research grants to the universities. At least
that's my assessment. That's a difficult job.
Universities are very jealous of each other.
Yeah, well, I sensed that. I ran a seminar
yesterday where we had 16 people there, the heads
of each of the disciplines. And we talked about
what the objectives were, what the problems were.
These were representatives from the
universities? Yes. And it was a five-hour
seminar. And when I got through, I was totally
exhausted. I flopped in bed because I was on for
five hours. And it wasn't that I was talking for
five hours. I was dealing with each one. There was
confrontation a little bit. It was friendly. An
exchange of ideas between these people. A lot of
the universities are very parochial. They're
very provincial. It's like nothing exists
outside of your borders. Yeah. And I sensed that
here and there in that room. And they sense a great
deal of power within themselves. A&M does, and
Texas does, of course. Well, I'm sure, you know, I
remember I reminded myself of that McGraw-Hill ad
where the guy's trying to sell something, and the
executive's sitting in the chair and says, I don't
know what you want, I don't know what you have to
sell, I don't want any of it, you know? That's it. In
a way, talking before that academic audience
there yesterday, I wondered if it was there. I
didn't sense it after a while, because I have some
experience in warming up the audience and getting
them to at least listen to me. I don't know if they
trusted me. But when it was all over, they all stood
up and applauded. I guess that means something, I
don't know. It certainly does. It certainly does,
but they probably wouldn't. Maybe it's Texas
politeness. If they just sat there and applauded,
I would agree. Well, they wanted to leave. But one
guy actually said, well, this is very
interesting. He said, but you didn't tell us
anything we don't know. Well, I know what I did,
that I got them all to think together. There were a
number of people in the room who didn't know
everything that they thought they knew. And a
number of people were very excited to ask me if I'd
come back. But one professional said, well, you
didn't tell me anything I didn't know. Well,
that's happened to me a half a dozen times in my
life. People have said that to me. And I'm always
amused. Because I don't know anything that they
don't know. It's just that what I do is package it.
And I put a discipline to it. So anyway, along the
lines, George and I have, I guess we've dreamed
together. And he exchanges ideas with me. And
sometimes I will then say, well, I think we ought to
do this or that in terms of the communication
factor to carry the message out. Are we going to
have a press conference? Are we going to do this or
that? I would say for the last 10 or 15 years, I
haven't really been heavily involved in the
account, in the nuts and bolts of the account. I'm a
consultant, essentially. And I'm an idea
generator. I'm a counsel. I'm an advice giver.
What I do is unearth dramatic ideas from the stuff
they already have, ways of presenting them. And
when I thought of Noguchi I knew that would bring
all kinds of people here. I wish we had it. You know
how much that Noguchi playground would be worth
today as a piece of art? I have no idea but I'm sure a
lot. probably ten, twenty million dollars, you
know, and just a piece. You took the components
out, you could sell them. I recently saw a fountain
at the Pompidou Museum in Paris. It would be
perfect for the woodlands, and I took all kinds of
pictures and sent them to George, and George tells
me, he's translating them now and giving them to
his designers. Whether he'll ever do it or not, it
may be too expensive, but it's a fountain that has,
a large fountain that has revolving pieces of art.
in the style of, you know Ricky St. Paul, have you
ever seen him work? No. You know the Michelin
figure with the pumped up balloon? Well she does
figures like that. And she did some figures that
are revolving in this fountain. They're kind of
childlike large blown up figures. And I think that
would be a tremendous joy. But you know, a lot of
these ideas that I developed are beyond budget.
The Woodlands isn't making a lot of money, which it
isn't. Can't spend that kind of money yet, but they
will someday, some of those things. So I keep
looking at things. Why does George Mitchell do
this? I interviewed him and tried to ask basically
the same question. I'm not sure I got an answer.
What does he do what? Why does he do the Woodlands?
What is it? What's the motivation? To build a city?
Because he... He just likes to do things. You know,
I'm really trying to understand the individual.
This is his creative monument. The other is a
business, you know. Yeah, this is not a business.
No, it's a creative monument to George, to a man's
vision to build what he considers a perfect city.
And George has rationalized that the urban
communities really are in the state of decay.
Yeah, right. He said that. You go around the
country and see all these communities. You go to
Hammond, Indiana, or Gary, Indiana, or
Indianapolis. Even Chicago itself has a terrible
problem with its downtown and is spending a lot of
money trying to revive it. Living conditions are
such that it's very difficult for people. Cost of
homes, all that kind of crime, schooling, all that
kind. Is there anything comparable to this in your
travels and experiences that you would really
relate or correlate? Well, the one that's built
Baltimore. It's called Reston. It's said to be
capital, but I haven't seen it. You mean Columbia?
You mean Columbia you're talking about? Yeah,
Columbia. It's the name of the company that built
it, Reston. Yeah, Reston built it. The community
is called Columbia. I haven't seen it, but I
understand it's nothing like this. It's a planned
community that's successful. George has
developed the most successful village of this
sort that was sponsored by the government. It was a
hug. The only one that really survived. And it will
survive. And luckily, George had an energy
company that could help subsidize it as it went
through the maturation period. And George, there
are some people who are naysayers. Members of his
own board said, George, you're nuts. What are you
doing this for? Energy companies making all these
profits, and you're pouring it into this thing.
Well, I think someday probably Mitchell Energy
will spin off either Mitchell Energy or the
Woodlands. And the Woodlands is going to be worth a
fortune, a tremendous fortune. This is a piece of
property. I don't know what it's carrying. So you
think it's really coming into its own. It's in the
developmental stage, too, basically. Yes. Well,
there are 28,000 people living there now. And when
I tell people that George acquired 85,000 acres,
in ten years in eight hundred different
transactions. I'm not sure of the exact figures,
but that's my recollection. Oh, it's your clock, I
think. Yeah, and the way he did his persistence,
his dogged persistence in getting this done and
pulling it together and hiring Roy Ferreira, you
know, for the landscaping and all that, the
terrain, and great architects. And I'm just
amazed that he that he can do so many things at one
time, remember them, give attention to detail.
You know, I go to the Mardi Gras down in Galveston. I
go in almost every year except one, I guess. And he
patrols the streets and he sees the exhibits are
right, and you know, all kinds of things. You know,
we've interviewed some twenty people in the
Woodlands, and three or four times now, during our
interview, the phone rang and George Mitchell was
on the phone to talk to this individual, who had no
direct relationship at all, I wouldn't have
thought. But that was a good indicator in my mind of
the close contact. Well, he remembers almost
everything you ever said to him or anything
anybody else has ever said to him. He still finds
time to give attention to his children. He still
finds time to play tennis every day. He plays a damn
good game of tennis. You ever seen him play? No, I
haven't, but I've heard. He's as good as they can.
At his age, I would say he's a top-ranked tennis
player. He's a great outdoorsman. He loves to fish
and hunt and all that kind of stuff. Our greatest
fun has been as he's turned me into an outdoorsman.
I'm a city dweller. I don't know how to fish. He's
taught me how to fish. He puts the shrimp on my hook,
and he throws it in the water, and I pull it in, and he
takes it off. He calls me the great white hunter. I
used to go out to Cook's Ranch to get some deer once
in a while. And I'm rated as blind by the Air Force. I
was given a certified disability discharge at the
base of my bad eyesight. And when I fire, a deer
drops. And I'm convinced they hang the deer up. And
when I fire, they drop it. I've never missed. And my
wife and I are in the blind there, and I'm ready to
shoot. She said, don't shoot. That's such a
beautiful deer. And the deer drops when you don't.
Once I fired, and I almost cried because the deer
ran off. And I said, oh, I may have wounded it. And
the ranger said, what happened? Did you go into the
wood after him? I said, I went as far as I could go.
Well, they were very worried about it. Because you
never miss a shot. And I said, no, I missed that one.
The next day we went in deep in the woods and the deer
had run in and died. Is that right? Yeah. That's the
only one I missed, I thought. Because we lost the
meat. We lost the animal. We destroyed an animal,
unfortunately. And I've been wild turkey
shooting. Oh, I once went... white goose hunting
with George, you know, in the southwest or
somewhere. Yeah, so he's given me that part of his
life, which I appreciate. An insight into him, we
went, we lay out crab pots in the bay, and we went out
one night about four o'clock when I first arrived,
and we put out these crab pots. We got out about a
half mile, and the motor conked out. Now, I said to
George, we'll both get in the water and we'll pull
the boat in, because it's only six feet there or
something like that. He said, oh no, I'll do it. You
stay in the boat. So if you're going to visualize
the picture, George has a rope around his neck. I'm
in the boat with one oar. All we have is one oar. And
I'm a half-assed singer, and I'm singing all the
Russian
songs. That's a memorable picture. George pulls
the boat in for about a It took us about three
quarters of an hour to get to shore. He's in the
water pulling it. And the mosquitoes, he had a
better deal. The mosquitoes were biting me.
That's probably why he got in the water. He knew
what he was doing. When I got to shore, I almost
passed out. I was so bitten. But it was a funny
sight, this processional of this great tycoon
pulling at the rope, and I'm in there. If there is a,
what do you think the public perception is of the
Woodlands, or should be, if it is, in other words,
where this meeting is in terms of what people
believe it to be and what it is, is that pretty well
now in conjunction?
Well, I think people in Houston, for example,
which is, the Houston area is their best market,
are beginning to appreciate I say, I don't know
what the percentage is, but I say there's an
increased perception, increased appreciation
of the woodlands, as far as I can tell by talking to
people that I meet from this area. I come in here and
I have friends here. At the start it used to be
considered Mitchell's Folly, you know, who's
going to move out there? But now these things that
are occurring, this Expressway that's coming
here. What's the name of the expressway? Hard Toll
Road. Hard Toll Road, you know, which makes it so
easy to get out here. The transportation system.
The pavilion is a stroke of genius, you know.
There's a lot of people who come out here who never
visited this place before. So I would say there's
an increased perception, which was hampered
somewhat by the economic environment. I'd say it
wouldn't be further along. And yet, all during
this past three or four years, they've done very
well, as I understand it, on a comparative basis
with what some of the real estate has done. And
there's everything here you could want. Now, as
more and more things are added here, the school
system and other things, and more jobs, and the
scientists out here, there'll be more people who
want to live out here. So I think it's going to be an
enormously successful place. And then, of
course, when the homeowners feel that they own
their villages and exercise more care in the
preservation of those villages and the
maintenance. Do you think those people will be
able to sustain the woodland's aura or character
once, in other words, in this weaning process?
There is a tension, apparently. Well, it would be
to their advantage to do so. It certainly would
now. I've been through a similar situation. I once
did a consulting job for a place called the
Nichols. There's a village, a cluster of villages
that's similar, run by the J.C. Nichols Company
out of Kansas City. They were the developers of the
original shopping center. First major drive-in
shopping center in the country. And it's still a
big and viable economic real estate empire. And
what happened was, as the villages, each of these
clusters took over ownership, proprietary
ownership of their villages, they wanted to make
certain changes, which distressed the J.C.
Nichols Company. And they began to agitate for
things. There are problems that occur when those
clusters take over ownership in terms of what they
want to do, what they don't want to do, and what
their attitude is toward the major benefactor,
which is the Woodlands Corporation. I can
anticipate all kinds of things happening in the
future. But nothing that's injurious or will
cause anything to happen here that will limit this
place. And little by little, George is adding
exciting elements here. To be able to have the PGA
here, which is fantastic. And to have Frank
Sinatra sing here, which is incredible. Were you
out here for that opening? No, no. No, we've heard
about it. He gave an incredible concert. He's a man
that's not in his prime anymore. But he's a great
showman. All kinds of things happening here. So by
starting my life all over, I would be living down
here, no question about it, because everything
that's here I love. What I don't see is a good place
to eat yet. And I don't see movie theaters that are
as convenient as I like them. Ultimately, there
has to be something more of a cultural nature with
people, legitimate maybe a repertory group here
or something like that, but that will come. How
about university-type complexes or
educational? Terribly important, sure, because
if you had a university out here and you can
participate in the cultural life of the
university and mix with some of those people who
are living here, it makes it a fuller life. I spent a
lot of time in Palm Springs, and I wouldn't spend
the time there if it weren't for the fact We have a
cultural center, and we have legitimate plays
come in, and the symphonies, visiting
symphonies, and all kinds of movie theaters if you
want to go. But I think that's going to come. And I
know George will see it in his lifetime. It's going
to take another 25 years, I would say, for the kind
of maturation that I'm talking about. Yeah, I've
heard that number used quite a lot. I see. It's a
long-range picture. But look what they've got
already. That's right. Incredible. One of the
problems of the woodlands, I've addressed it a
number of times, and I keep working on things over
the years. If I agitate enough, ultimately
somebody does something about it, because they
get tired of hearing me talk about it. When you
drive into the woodlands, you don't see the
woodlands. You start on the expressway drive in,
and you say, what the hell is this? It's a lot of
trees. And you see there's a name identification.
And you say, well, do I want to see Grogan's Mill or
whatever it is? I don't know what it is. Where's the
pavilion? How do I find it? And all that stuff. So
I've been pushing for kind of a map, a picture map,
like Life magazine. You open it up, and there'd be a
corollary number on a post, which is number one,
and the map shows you what's behind the tree. Yeah,
a walking tour. A walking tour of the place. See,
now, they've gone so far as they're doing a picture
book now. But that isn't what I have in mind. Maybe
the picture book will suffice. People can get
around. But I want a numbered walking tour or auto
tour of this place. When you're able to look at it,
if you're just to cut off the, go through the top and
see this place, it's incredible what's here. But I
see the gorgeous homes here that people are able to
get. Of course, it's a double-edged sword, too.
One of the things that I sense some of the
residents, you know, we were talking earlier
about whether the local associations will pick up
the gauntlet and continue. I see them as actually,
in some ways, jealous of the good things about the
Woodlands, maybe even the Woodlands Corporation
has been. Because they've really bought into the
ideas here. That's why they're here. But I've
lived here since 73 and have driven down to Houston
all the time. And frankly, the Woodlands, as you
said, was to me a wall of trees on the right side of
I-45 as you drove down. And it had no meaning
whatsoever. But at the same token, were I living
here, You know, there's some mixed feelings
about, do I want a walking tour where individuals,
you know, from elsewhere, you know, where the
woodlands becomes a tourist kind of event for its
continued growth. You live here now? No. Oh, you
did live here? No. College Station. College
Station is where I'm from. I live up here in
Coliseum. Well, you know, it's the same problem
we're dealing with, the universities versus
Harkin. If the people who live in the woodlands
realize that if this community grows, they'll get
more things here, they'll get that movie theater
right in here. They'll get the shopping centers
and all that. So you have to take a long view of the
welfare. And my feeling is that if more people came
and saw this place, more people would want to come
and live here. It's that simple. I've always, I
like the title, I guess, The Machine in the Garden.
And I see that as one of the possible tensions of the
future in the woodlands. Too much development. Of
course, the kind of development they're trying to
do is trying to tone that down a little bit. Too much
business, if you will, that might disturb the
garden aspects of the woodlands as one of the
futures. They don't want any infringement on
their privacy. No, that's right. Can you have it
both? Can you have progress and can you have
progress? Look, I live in condominiums in Chicago
and in Palm Springs. And there's some things I have
to do as kind of a social enterprise. I have to do as
an owner of a condominium apartment or home. I've
got to live with my neighbors. I don't like the fact
that the pool is filled with children on holidays.
I don't like the fact the neighbor across the
street has a dog that barks once in a while. or
there's another neighbor who's visited by a
relative with a recreational vehicle, and it's
parked in the street, some things I don't like. If
they're against the condominium rules, I protest
it and get it stopped. But if it's just a violation
of what I consider my privacy, I either have to live
with it or I have to move. And the same thing here. If
you're living here, if you want the place to offer
you all the good things you want in life, You have to
participate in the growth of this community and
the recognition of this community. I think that's
the key. And apparently the Woodlands has done a
good job, I think, of organizing such that there is
participation. Well, the infrastructure
itself. The infrastructure itself is a
conservative instrument. It maintains, well,
the natural environment. That's a sacrosanct.
Yes, sure. In fact, they're moving. Bill
Kendrick, who's responsible for the grounds
here, One thing to ask myself is, is there, in fact,
a set of rules, regulations? Has the things which
you have developed been codified? And he says, no,
but we're going to do that. He says, we've arrived
at the point where we can do that. And I think that
infrastructure is what's going to preserve the
integrity of the ruins, for want of a better term,
through the stages of growth.
I think it's an exciting project, and it's true to
its principles. And as long as George stays alive,
it'll be true. He's got a son on the board now, and
his son probably will carry on those principles
for the years. And George, of course, has always
maintained control over the corporation, so
nobody can take it away from him. Not from the
standpoint of preserving his wealth so much, but
preserving his control. You know, we talk about
proxy fights and all that. Can't do that with
Mitchell Energy, you know. What the hell is he is
when a guy owns more than 60% of the company? And,
you know, you talk to George about wealth, he never
is concerned about his own wealth. I've never
heard him talk along those lines. God, I just lost
$2 million today or something like that. He
doesn't do that like most executives. That's an
abstraction to him. It's a benchmark when he has to
look at it. What he's mostly concerned is going
ahead with his dreams. And that includes, of
course, the enormous job. Have you looked at
Galveston recently, what he's done there? Yeah, I
spent a lot of time there. Yeah. Well, it's
enormous what they've done. Each year I come down,
there's something new. The restaurant across the
way, I forget the name of it. God, you can't get in
the place. And that Irish pub, can't get in the
place. his vision and building, you know,
bringing the Mardi Gras back. Yeah, that worked.
Yeah, great idea.
I guess the other arena that I am concerned with
here is the art. I keep pushing the concept of
having more art for aesthetic appreciation and
also ultimately it should be an artistic
adventure to come out here, you know, just to look
at these. famous sculpture. One of the best things
he has here was done by a friend of mine that George
and I visited in Rome. We went to his studio and
George commissioned. It was Robert Cook. I don't
know if you've seen his piece. Which one is it? It's
the one where the young man stands on the shoulder.
It's a beautiful piece. I have a big collection of
that man. George saw it when he was with me. Next
thing I knew he commissioned it. I didn't even know
it. until it was erected here. And he sprung a
surprise on me. He had Bob Cook do it. It's a lovely
piece. I think it's the best pleat piece of the
woodlands, frankly. You ought to have more pieces
like that, that are a fine piece of art, that are
expressive. And I feel that there ought to be a
universal, consistent theme of the collection of
art. See, if I were starting fresh, I would have
nothing but Southwestern art here. by great
Southwestern artists and sculptors. At this
point, I feel that the collection is kind of
random. Somebody saw something, and they bought
it, and they like it. It's a little apocalyptic.
Yeah. I really feel that what I would have started
with either Southwestern artists or great
American artists, but this would lend itself to
Southwestern artists. Or a lot of Mexican art,
Zuniga's and people like that.
I used to go to the University out there to see those
murals. I've not seen those. Fantastic, yeah.
There will be ultimately stuff here like that. I
would certainly enhance the quality and the
appeal of the literature. Well, I think we've
pretty well covered the... My God. What time did we
start? Well, about 9. An hour and a half. Well,
that's pretty good. Well, this is a big treat for me
to have somebody listen to me. Who wants to listen
to me for half an hour? I'd like to know more about
your public relations business and some
interviews.